Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Vicky
Olse, and today we're going to talk about some
work that she's done, anthropological work on the Atlantic
and transatlantic slave trade. Which also includes a site
here where I live in Portugal. So Doctor Oso,
welcome to the show. Welcome back to the show,
actually. Thank,
thank you so much for being on again.
Thank you, Ricardo. Thank you for inviting me and
for giving me the, the opportunity to talk about
this, this project and this site. Mhm.
So let's start perhaps with a broader question and
get, and then get into specifics here. So, uh,
as I said, we've done work on the Atlantic
and transatlantic slave trade, particularly through the study of
African strontium isoscapes and isotopic investigations. I mean, could
you tell us about that? What did you study
there specifically? How did you do it and what
did you learn?
Yeah, um, so the, the basic foundation for, uh,
me as a, you know, biological anthropologist and an
isotope nerd, uh, to, to get engaged in, in
the archaeology of the transatlantic slave trade was to
build a foundational isotope map for the African continent,
uh, more specifically for sub-Saharan Africa. And the isotope
system that I love working with because it's extremely
powerful is strontium isotope analysis. So where you look
at the uh radiogenic um isotope of strontium, which
is strontium 87, and relate that to the stable
isotope of strontium, strontium 86. And so the strontium
is a, is a trace element that is. Abundant
in nature like everywhere, you know, even here in
the, in the dust in my office here and
it is in your body and my body it
is uh in the in the mouth that I
have here in front of me, uh, but in
trace amounts and uh strontium is a really powerful
tool in bioarchaeology, um, to reconstruct the origin of
an organism. On the planet, particularly based on a
very geological fingerprint that we can look at with
strontium. So strontium isotopes primarily relate to the age
of bedrock, but also to many other factors that
influence the weathering of this trace element out of
the bedrock and making it. Available to living things,
primarily like first plants and then the animals that
eat those plants and then eventually the humans that
eat those plants and or those animals in a
given region. And so a local strontium isotope fingerprint,
so to speak, um, will embed in every body
tissue that you have in your um in your
any tissue pretty much that contains uh particularly calcium
because we're very lucky that uh strontium actually biochemically,
um, or yeah, looks very similar to calcium. We
consider it bioequivalent, so the body will just like
accidentally or involuntarily every now and then incorporate an
atom of strontium into the skeleton, for example, just
instead of calcium without any negative side effects of
that. That's just like the beauty of nature being
a little bit more flexible in sourcing its building
blocks, so to say. But um this is a
method, so strontium isotope analysis is really an important
method in archaeology to trace the migration or movement
of humans across larger scale. So like there's incredible
archaeological research that has involved this technique and looking
at movements of like early Neolithic farmers or uh
migration period uh sites or, you know, Belviro complex,
you, you name it. And also in the study
of the transatlantic slave trade, this method has been
used specifically in archaeological sites in the African diaspora,
so archaeological sites that are in the Americas largely,
uh, so we're speaking, uh, mainly sites in Brazil,
uh, in Brazil, but also the Caribbean and North
America. And used strontium isotope analysis to basically identify
the presence of first generation victims of the slave
trade in so-called slave cemeteries in the Americas, right?
And so there's like, um, often in, in those
sites, often they're like, you know, rescue excavations, or
like, you know, there's like some development. Uh, OF
like a new, uh, a new road or like
a new parking lot or, you know, a kindergarten
being built or what you name it, um, in
the case of Brazil it was just some people
that were wanting to do some earthwork in their
backyard and then they encounter like these long term
forgotten cemeteries of African individuals that were forcefully brought
to the Americas. And so then archaeologists are interested
in the question like who of these individuals are,
you know, locally born and raised, no matter if
we're talking about the Caribbean or South America or
North America, and do we actually like, um. Detect
some individuals that were actually born and raised in
Africa, and so are like basically survivors of the
so-called Middle Passage, right? Like that actually are among
those that that survived that horrific trip from the
old world to the new world, right, where there
were incredibly high mortality rates on those slave ships.
Um, AND so that was the research that was
already existing when I got interested in this sphere,
uh, sphere, um, and I got really interested in
doing a little bit more than just saying, OK,
an individual here at a very coastal, uh, site
in, let's say, South Carolina, uh, is likely coming
from Africa. I think that's already very, very, you
know, valuable information. But if we would just have
like a more detailed understanding of how strontium isotope
ratios are actually distributed across sub-Saharan Africa, there must
be regions where we have really high strontium isotope
values because we have really, really ancient bedrock in
a lot of parts of Africa, and then there
will be regions where we have very low isotope
values. So then we could actually not just identify
a person as coming from sub-Saharan Africa, which is,
you know, a very, very gigantic landmass, but more
specifically, well, where exactly is this person from, which
says a lot about like that person's like identity,
um, you know, and just cultural background, which. Forms
a lot of the identity of communities in the
African diaspora today and so that is exactly what
we did in this project. So we went ahead
and built a strontium isotope map for sub-Saharan Africa
for exactly this application and actually many more that
I'd also be happy to talk about.
Sure, but then tell us then about the work
you've done at Valdo de Gaferia in Lagos here
in Portugal. I mean, what did you find there
and what motivated you to study that site specifically?
Yeah, so, um, most people don't even know about
Baladaga Fia as a, as an archaeological site, which
is, I consider as one of the most important
archaeological sites that has been discovered so far in
the last like 20 years or so. Um, IT
is the only mass burial site that we have
in all of Europe that's associated with the slave
trade. Um, AND we're talking here about the very,
very beginning of the transatlantic slave trade that was,
uh, initiated by the, the Portuguese, like starting to
like, um, checking out like the West African coast,
right, uh, and coming back with enslaved individuals from
like different parts of the uh West and later
Western Central African coastline. And so this site is
unparalleled in Europe. There's no site that is comparable.
We don't even are aware of any burial sites
of enslaved Africans like anywhere in the UK, in
France, or in Spain, or in Portugal elsewhere, right?
Though they. Must be there. We know that they
exist, but often they're covered by some buildings or
structures that are also very old by now and
are normally, you know, protected from, you know, being
destroyed just so you can excavate like those so-called
slave cemeteries, but they exist. Valle dega Fia is
special because it was unknown that there is this
site. Uh, IT is located in the Algarve, um,
town of Lagos, uh, in southern, uh, Portugal, and
Lagos is a very beautiful, uh, town. Uh, I've
been, I, before I started working in this realm,
I, I have been there myself as a tourist.
It's a very, very pretty, um. Very touristy place,
uh, and the motto of the city is like,
you know, we, we're like the city of the
center of discoveries, right, because like back in the
days, um, at the beginning of like the, the,
the Portuguese expansion of uh checking out the West
African coast, um, they, uh, they largely like left
from the port in Lagos because it's perfectly situated
down in the Algarve. Uh, AND Lagos became very,
uh, an important place because of that, right, uh,
with a lot of very important figures that, that
were based in, in Lagos. So in 2009, the
city um uh started, uh, or it's not the
city, it's like probably like a company that started
excavating an area just outside of the medieval historical
downtown area, which is kind of like enclosed by
a really cool old medieval city wall. And just
outside of the city wall, they did an excavation
that went really, really deep because they were building
a parking garage. So like an underground parking garage,
it goes like 2 floors down, and then I
think it has like 2 stories on top, um,
or at least 1. Um, AND so they were
excavating the site and they bumped into not just
like foundations of historical structures, which they later identified
as the structures that were associated with the leprosarium.
So, like outside of the city of Lagos, like
they had a place where they would like treat
and store, you know, people that had, uh, were
infected with leprosy. As in many other places in
Europe, uh, was very, very, uh, custom, uh, and
so there are a couple of human remains that
are associated with, with local, um, people that have
came down with, with leprosy and died there. But,
um, the excavation, the main discovery of the excavation
is that they found, uh, a mass burial in
the cities or in the historical city's trash pit.
So we have like outside of the city wall,
like a big ditch where people were throwing their
trash in, right, like literally just normal garbage, late
medieval garbage. And within this deposit, you find the,
they found the human remains of 158 men, women
and children of African origin. And so we know
that they were of African origin because a lot
of them have dental modifications, so these intentional modifications
of often, particularly the anterior teeth. So filing in
like different shapes and so these are the many
reasons why people have historically done that, not just
in, in sub-Saharan Africa, but also in other places
in the world, uh, it can be like medicinal
or um can be an initiation rites and stuff
like that, right? So many reasons why people have
done that. Um, AND so that already hinted at
them being from sub-Saharan Africa, and then a few
individuals also have objects with them that are, um,
you know, interpreted to be of African origin, such
as like some beads and some like little carved
figurines, um, and, um. You know, the biological anthropologists
also like, I think, like, thought like from the,
from the morphology of the human remains that they
looked African. We know that that is um pretty
much pseudoscience, like that, that kind of approach is
like nowadays, like abandoned that you like look at
the skull and say like, oh, that person looks
African or Asian. Uh,
YEAH, that's, that's science, right?
Exactly, exactly. And we know that that is actually
pseudoscience and it is actually holding up like scientific
scrutiny, right? But still, people, um, rightfully, uh, had
from the get-go, a strong, strong impression that these
might be African individuals, which was a couple of
years later confirmed by some genetic analysis of a
handful of individuals that identified them as sub-Saharan African.
So, OK, so you have like a very, very
interesting situation here where you have folks that want
to build a parking garage and they bump into
almost 160 individuals from a historical context, and they
look. Like they're coming from Africa, like how on
earth did they get to Lagos? Well, the answer
is very, very simple. It is that they were
among the very, very first victims of what we
in the beginning called the Atlantic slave trade, that
the Portuguese then later expand with other European nations
to what we refer to as the transatlantic trade,
right? Like bringing. Um, LIKE sailing down to, uh,
to different parts of Africa, uh, you know, capturing
and buying African people, and then crossing the Atlantic,
selling them there and then coming back with produce
from the Americas, right, like sugar, cane, sugar and
stuff like that, cotton later. So, um, we're at
the very beginning of this that like enslaved Africans
are brought to Portugal and are sold in Lagos.
Actually Lagos, uh, we have historical records that the
first slave market and the first auction of enslaved
Africans in all of Europe is exactly here in
Lagos. I think the first reported. Uh, AUCTION that
we know of, uh, of African people is in
160008. So very, very early, OK. Uh, SO really,
uh, incredibly early and like some, some of the
radiocarbon dates that we have from these individuals, they're
not very, very accurate, and we also like don't
know from the literature, um, how these dates were
actually obtained, which is a little bit problematic for
us to actually know. How accurate they are, but
they, they look like they're falling into like the
first half of the 15th century, so 1640s, something
like that, uh, and that is when we know
that a lot of more ships were actually landing
in Lagos with enslaved Africans on board, um, and,
and having them in the local slave market and
selling them, right? And then about in the beginning
of the 15th 16th century, there's actually a royal
decree that sees like how much money is actually
flowing into Lagos because of the, the, the trafficking
of human lives, uh, and then it's banned in
Lagos and moved actually to, to Lisbon, right? So
that the, the authorities there have a little bit
more of a say of that nice source of
income, right? OK, so we're, we're in this, this,
uh, crazy position that again there is no site
in all of Europe that is anywhere similar to
the site that is called Valleda Garia that refers
to or can be translated to Valley of the
Leprosarium, which is because there was this, uh, leprosy
there. Sorry, my dog is playing with himself here.
And um and it's also like very interesting, so
it's not only the only site of its kind
in all of Europe, it is actually also the
oldest site that we know of in the entire
world. So we don't have any site that is
this old associated with the slave trade anywhere in
the Americas, right? Um, AND so that makes this
site extremely unique and actually studying the, the ancestors
that were discovered at this site. Not all have
good skeletal preservation, but many do, uh, is actually
giving us a very unique insight into where these
people came from, who they were, and. Gives us
also like a lot of responsibility to actually communicate
that to the public, particularly to folks, um, our,
our colleagues and, uh, um, you know, communities like
in the African diaspora uh at large, but also
like uh in, in their home countries where these
individuals came from in Africa.
So, uh, and tell us about how the Portuguese
authorities have dealt with this discovery. I mean, because
I, I mean, I'm Portuguese, I live in Portugal,
and, and if it wasn't for you, I wouldn't
have heard of it at all.
So yeah, yeah, yeah, thanks for, for bringing that
up. I think like this is, uh, this is
actually something I, uh, I never thought that me
as a scientist that I would, um, you know,
like. Have like a much, much bigger uh energy
input now like rather than like publishing the, the
research that I'm doing. I'm actually right now investing
so much more time and, and, and energy in
communicating my findings with the Afro-descendant community in Portugal
and also with the public because of exactly this.
I cannot believe that this site is remaining invisible
to the public. And so I'm not the only
one who's like really putting an effort into, you
know, raising awareness of this site, uh, and, uh,
you know, making people aware of its existence, but
also like what the impacts of ignoring this site
uh are to African descendant communities in Portugal today,
they're like extremely offended by the fact that uh
governmental institutions and also the local municipality is. Um,
NOT giving much attention to this site, right? So
the interesting thing is, uh, first of all, if
you would tell anyone who works in the archaeology
of the African diaspora context that, that this discovery,
it had a couple of news articles, so like
Reuters reported about it. There was like a. In
an article in National Geographic Portugal as well. So
it was not completely missed by the media, um,
and there was a press release obviously about it
because the folks that excavated the site, there was
a private excavation company, they, they very, very quickly
realized the importance of this site. However, although there
were like quite some discussions about like, what should
happen after the discovery, the local municipality just went
ahead and gave the company that wanted to build
that, that parking lot, they gave them the go,
and they just, you know, got all the human
bodies out, out of the lot that they had
excavated, and then they built a parking lot on
top of it. Um, AND the city even, uh,
confirmed that they could go ahead and, uh, put
a mini golf course on top of that parking
structure. And so. Uh, A lot of people in
the community, including myself, like I consider myself like,
uh, part of the community who really deeply cares
about, um, these ancestors from, from Lagos. Um, WE'RE
very offended by the fact that instead of making
the site visible as an absolute unique opportunity to
commemorate the, the fatalities of the transatlantic slave trade,
um, and to also be transparent about Portugal's involvement
in it, to then just like completely erase the
site and just build up a parking garage with
a mini golf course where people have fun. You
know, it's like a very, very bizarre decision, and
I know that there was some debate about it
back in the days when this decision had to
be made, but um I don't think that many
voices were heard, uh, or, or, or also like
gave any kind of like informed consents. The community,
for example, the African descendant community was never consulted
in any way or form, which is very unusual
in a context like this. Um, IF you compare
it with the rest of the world, if you
would find a site like this. So the one
thing that the local municipality actually did was to
put a plaque, like a little brass plaque, up
in front of the parking garage, and the plaque
is incredibly bizarre. It is, uh, it has text
in Portuguese and also in English on it. And
basically talks about like the, the foundation of that
leprosarium building that were found and you can still
see them. So that's probably why they talk a
lot about that. So it's multiple lines, like a
whole paragraph about like these weird stones that, you
know, who cares, right? Like, it's like, you know,
it's a, it's a historical structure, yes, but OK.
And then the fact that almost 160. Tortured and
like killed people from sub-Saharan Africa and these individuals
were, you know, the, the way that they were
treated, we can see that in the, the human
remains of these individuals. They were in horrific condition
and I'd be happy to elaborate more on that.
So the plaque is basically referring that the remains,
the skeletal remains of people with negroid features were
found. And then the plaque ends. And the language
is so incredibly offensive that um it was actually
showcased in a recent film, uh, an incredible film
that I highly recommend by the filmmaker Dulce Fernandez.
It's a film called Tales of Bolivian, Tales of
Oblivion. Um, IT'S actually screening, I think, like in
New York City, like next week, uh, and it's
showcased like this summer, uh, it was released in
Portugal. Um, IT'S a really, really incredible film that
is dedicated to this site and like how these,
the story of the site is basically made invisible,
uh, and they, they showcased like, uh, or Luche
like the filmmaker showcased in this film like that
the how insulting this language and how violent this
language on the plaque is that actually the local
municipality took it down. Earlier this year or later
last year,
I mean, I mean, I guess it's not only
insulting but offensive, but it's also unscientific,
right? Absolutely, absolutely, exactly, thank you. Exactly, but I
think they put the plaque up before there was
any actual data like publications, so they just went
with the first assessment that was pretty much unscientific,
exactly. Um, SO now the plaque is gone and
now the site is invisible entirely, right? It's a
parking garage with a mini golf course on top
and there's some, the European Union actually gave a
lot of money, uh, I think we're talking about
millions to the municipality to update or renovate the
so-called slave. Market museum that is in downtown Lagos
because they actually the slave market, this place that
I mentioned earlier that is the oldest of its
kind in all of Europe is literally a 3
minute walk away from the mass burial site, right?
It's right around the corner and this museum received
a lot of funding to be updated and be
brought up to speed in terms of museum pedagogy
and things like that. And the museum fails incredibly
in mentioning the site and really giving updated details
about the site. They mentioned that there is a
site nearby where they were found, uh, not really
saying anything about like the extent, right, like 158
humans. You know, it's like, you know, you can
leave the, you can leave the museum feeling like,
oh, maybe like they, they found like some, you
know, 5 individuals or something like that. It's not
a big deal. Um, AND generally, like I, I
just visited the museum this summer with uh about
100 people from all over the world, including a
lot of African colleagues and friends and colleagues from
the African diaspora, and um they were very, very.
Very shocked by the museum and like how the
museum is kind of speaking about like, oh yeah,
Portugal was involved in initiating the transatlantic slave trade,
but then it still goes very much on to,
you know. How, how impressive these ships were and
how impressive, uh, impressive this whole endeavor was, right?
And so it really doesn't have the, the tact
and the, the humility and humanity that we would
rather like to see in a, in an exhibition
like that, that is there to inform the public,
uh, rather than just, you know, uh, whitewashing it
for the tourism there.
Right, and so there was this ancestor tribute. I
mean, tell us about it. What was it and
why did you decide to participate in it?
Oh yeah, so, um, so this was, this, this
summer, um, so we, we organized the event, um,
to bring awareness, uh, to the site and to
honor the, the ancestors that, that lost their lives
in, in Lagos, you know, more than 400 years
ago, um, but, uh, this was a, uh, a
collaboration with, um, the so-called African, uh, sorry. Ancestor
Tribute Collective, which is a group of Afro-descendant activists
from Lisbon. Most of, you know, folks of color
live in Lisbon these days, and they have been
organizing ancestor tributes like commemorating the victims of the
transatlantic slave trade for almost a decade now. So
that's an annual beautiful event that is hosted in
downtown Lisbon. Uh, WHERE, uh, the ancestors at large,
you know, not just like those that were brought
to Portugal, but also, uh, any, any victims that
were, um, trafficked by the Portuguese, um, and the
Portuguese colonies, um, and they do this event every
year and it's like associated with music and art
and, you know, giving flour and water offerings to,
to the ocean, right? Because, you know, you can
be at the waterfront in Lisbon. Um, AND so
I, I was contacted by the Ancestor Tribute Collective,
uh, leadership, um, and, uh, we started, you know,
talking like how we can actually like work together
and like how, uh, I can also share the
results of my research uh with the Afro-descendant community
in Lisbon. So, um, I'm not just collaborating with
the Ancestor Tribute Collective but also with Jazz, which
is the association of uh Afro descendants that is
based in Lisbon as well so there are many
or there are several different community groups that are
very, very active in, um, you know. Generally, like,
um, you know, fighting against like, um, discrimination, um,
but also like bringing kind of like the, the
black community together in, in Portugal, particularly in Lisbon.
Um, AND so, I mentioned to my collaborator from
the African, from the ancestor tribute collective Kadimba, Aristotelis
Kadimba, I mentioned to him that I will be
actually in the Algarve this summer because there's a
huge Africanist archaeology conference where We were kind of
anticipating at least 500 people from all over the
world are coming together that are working in Africa,
a lot, most of them are a lot of
them actually archaeologists from different African nations, uh, and
we're all going to be in the Algarve, and
it would be an absolutely incredible opportunity to actually
showcase the site and bring. These many, many people
with a key, keen interest actually in, in a,
in a site like this that is so um
uh nobody, none of them have ever heard about
it, right? So we did a session at the
conference actually talking about the site and more broadly
about the archaeology of the transatlantic slave trade. Um,
AND then so with the conference, with the uh
ancestor Tribute Collective, and then also with a lot
of support, uh, through funding from the National Geographic
Society, um, that funded an explore community uh grant,
um. We, we just organized, organized this event, uh,
on a Saturday afternoon, that was like on the
26th of July, and we arrived in Lagos with
about 100 people, I think we were around 115,
120 people. Uh, AGAIN, from all over the world,
um, and went to the site. Um, WE, um,
you know, gave different speeches about the site, so
like that, you know, really informing people, looking down
onto this parking garage. So we were in the
park on the other side of the street, looking
down onto this parking garage, um, just basically like
informing everybody who joined us, like, what actually happened
there, uh, what is the scientific evidence that we
have about what these individuals went through and who
they are. Right, like the where they're from, it's
kind of like my, uh, my contribution here. And,
um, and then we kind of like, uh, went
through several different ceremonial aspects of honoring them, like
they're in the very creative ways. So one way
was actually that um the ancestor tribute collective, I
can show you this, um, actually suggested names for
some of these ancestors. So, um, all of these
individuals that are now stored in plastic containers um
in the basement of a. Uh, ARCHAEOLOGICAL company, their,
their numbers, right? They are like, they're, they have
like, you know, it's not even that they have
burial numbers, they actually like the individuals themselves are,
are listed only as numbers. And so the ancestor
Tribute Collective, um, Uh, suggested names for two individuals
where I could share some, uh, information about them.
Uh, SO one individual, uh, we suggested the name
Kalemba, uh, and the other one, Mbanza, and, uh,
according to my Uh, isotopic data, it looks like
these two individuals could have come from what is
today Angola, and so these are, uh, names that
are, uh, Kikongo, uh, and, uh, Kimbundu, so both
languages that are, um, typical for Angola, um. And
so that the naming suggestion that was very, very
powerful because these names also carry a lot of
meaning, uh, and Aristotleus Kadimba is specialized in, in,
and he wrote a book about Angolan names, so
it's very, very well versed to actually select names
with the help of the community. And then the
next step. WAS to lay down a wreath, like,
so we brought a big flower wreath, and so
where this very offensive plaque was before, um, we
actually put up a big flower wreath that was
dedicated to the individuals that were found there. Um,
AND then we did a procession into the parking
garage with music and all attendees, so more than
100. People, um, to actually like walk on the
sites where these human remains had been laying for
400 years and then we went down to the
waterfront and did like a very traditional ancestor tribute,
again, like doing flower offerings and water offerings to
the ocean. And had like a wonderful batu music
group there from um this kind of music and
dance style from Capo Verde, uh, so very much
like based in the cultural legacies of, of the
slave trade and like multiple different uh ethnic groups,
like, you know, forming new music and new, um,
uh, new dances. Um, SO it was an absolutely
incredible, incredible afternoon. It took the whole afternoon. And
there was a lot of very strong emotions, and
we all felt very, very empowered and very um.
The whole event felt extremely meaningful uh to most
of us, um, and, uh, yeah, it was very,
very moving, particularly when we had the moment of
silence at the parking garage. Um, YOU know, a
lot of, uh, a lot of our colleagues, uh,
you know, they, they, they, you know, had, had
tears in their eyes, uh, that, you know, it
takes a group of archaeologists and local community activists
to actually honor the people that were found there
more than, you know, 15 years ago, and an
event like this has not taken place, which is
crazy.
Right. So, uh let me ask you then, uh,
just a final question that will be like a
two-part question. So the first part is, uh, do
you know at all what will happen to the
remains then? And the second part is uh related
and is about, so, um, of course, sometimes it
happens, uh, frequently when anthropologists, uh, take, uh, remains
like this to study them in the lab or
some uh some other place and then, uh, I
mean, they either have to They, they, they either
keep them or give it, give them back to
their respective communities if there's that kind of communication
and I mean sometimes there are a few scientists,
anthropologists that I, I'm not, uh, want, uh, I
don't want to call them necessarily racist but they
take issue. With the communities having the remains back
because they say, oh, it's science, I mean, whatever,
and the, the same thing happens sometimes also with
uh museums in Western countries where they basically keep
some of the things they took from their former
colonies and then they don't want to give them
back. I mean, it's the same kind of dynamic.
I mean, why do you think, uh, as an
anthropologist, I think that you probably have a good
understanding of this. Why is it important for uh
people to, to get back the remains of their
ancestors? I mean, why should, uh, people as scientists
take that into consideration?
Mhm. Yeah, so that is a really, really important
question and that is one that is actually uh
surprisingly difficult to work around or to try to
contribute to in the Portuguese context because, uh, unlike
other places, uh, in the diaspora, in the African
diaspora, you don't have like any rules or regulations
in this framework, right? So in, uh, in, uh,
I think generally there's an. Istanding in North America
that uh working with indigenous human remains undergoes a
lot of scrutiny and there are a ton of
laws since the 1990s, right, like inhibiting any kind
of research on the ancestral remains of indigenous peoples
here from, from what we're, for example, in right
now in the United States. States but also in
Canada with First Nations, right? So there are laws
on the books that are prohibiting that and also
there's more and more scrutiny when we work with
uh the human remains of enslaved Africans uh in
in the Americas, right? And not just like here
in the United States but also in other places.
Brazil is taking this very, very serious with the
sites that they have. In Portugal, there's no such
laws or regulations or community or like scientific community
consent on this, which is understandable because like this
is the only site we have, right? So you,
you cannot really um expect that there are regulations
and guidelines, you know, ethical guidelines for a site
that is as unique as this one. So the,
the archaeologists and biological anthropologists that have, um, you
know, studied these human remains now since their excavation,
there have been like dozens of publications that have
come out studying these human remains. They basically think
that any kind of community engagement. So communicate, community
engagement in this case would be uh primarily with
the Afro-descendant community in Portugal, right? Um. Uh, THEY
think it's political, and that is, hence it's political
and as political, it's unscientific. Um, IN different parts
of the world we have a different perspective on
that as scientists, so I personally have been raised
and educated that science, yes, should be apolitical, should
not be politically. Motivated but uh it should also
not be racist uh ideally it should be anti-racist,
right? Um, AND so that's what we try to
do when we're educating our students uh to be
um sensible about these things, to be sensitive, right?
Um. And so when I actually started working on
this site, uh, I was very much shocked from
the, from the beginning to see how, um, how
hostile the Portuguese colleagues were towards the idea of
community engagement. So then I said like, OK, then
I'm going to do communicate community engagement. So before
I started sampling any human remains, I had a
meeting with representatives of the African Southern community, particularly
with jazz, which are absolutely. Wonderful people to, to
work with and communicate with, and they brought together
people that were very interested in like, what, what
is this lady, this weird German lady that works
in the US like what is she going to
do with these ancestors and what are, what, you
know, what is she going, or what are the
bioarchaeologists doing at all because they were never, um,
they were never consulted or informed in any way,
right? And so the, the, the Portuguese colleagues, they,
they, they don't really like that at all, right?
Uh, AND it actually almost like jeopardized the whole
project of me doing that. But um, You know,
we, we have made progress, I think, so like
now the, the, the Afro descending community is actually
very well informed about what's going on. So this
summer, I gave 4 talks um uh in Portugal,
um, uh, or, or, or events, right, like community
outreach events, uh, 2 of which were in Lisbon.
And reached like really like a lot of people
and we had incredible discussions with the audience after
each presentation where I really summarized like, this is
what we know, uh, and also make clear that
people understand that we have no say in what
was actually going to happen with the human remains
because we as a community of care, like, so
like as a group of people, a large group
of people. Portuguese citizens but also international citizens, um,
we don't really have a say in what is
going to happen to these human remains. Um, THEY
are in boxes in, uh, in a, in a,
in a private excavation company in Coimbra, so very
far away from, from, from Lagos, like more in
the central of, of Portugal, and they're still being
studied and they're still in plastic containers and they
are still just labeled with numbers. And the Afro-descendant
community considers that as continued violence towards these ancestors,
and it would actually not take much. To reduce
the level of violence, for example, by acknowledging that
they should maybe get like a little bit more
care and consideration of the way that they are
stored. So that is like some of the discussion
we had this, this summer, right? People would actually
be much more comfortable if we would know that
they, the individuals were not in plastic crates, but
rather in coffin-like wooden boxes. Maybe uh blessed by,
um, you know, with, with certain rituals, there's like
a lot of like ritual uh that can happen
associating music or offerings and blessings that would just
like take away some of like this really neutral
ice cold way of treating these ancestors and why
it's important is because these ancestors. Never got a
funeral, right? They were never properly buried. They were
thrown into the trash. So that makes them quite
different from uh some ancestor, no matter from what
time period that was buried and put to rest
by their family or their community, right? These people
were torn out of their communities and thrown away,
right? And so we think that they should just
get a little bit more or a lot more.
For affection and care in death, now that we
know who they are and what happened to them,
however, you bring up a very, very important point,
which is, um, should they go back to where
they're coming from and like who, who, who would
receive them, right? So that's a huge question that
we also debated with community members all like in
July in, in Portugal. So according to my research,
and I did not only contact, uh, conduct strontium
isotope analysis with, with a team of students, international
students, but uh also the, the colleagues from University
of Coimbra who were involved and, and assisted us
with sampling the human remains, um. So we found
that like the, the vast majority of the individuals
apparently comes from different parts of West Africa. So
that's combined strontium isotopes combined with oxygen isotopes, carbon,
nitrogen, sulfur. So we did the whole suite of
isotopic techniques that you can throw at a human
skeleton at this point in order to investigate a
person's origin. And um it's um. So, with my
work, I can like kind of limit it or
limit the region of origin to some very discrete
areas within West or Western Central Africa, um, but
we can often not pin it down to like
11 place where they should go back. And then
like, ideally, there would be like still a community
today that you could return the these ancestral remains
to. So this is not how it works, OK?
So repatriation of these ancestors would be very, very
difficult, um, because the receiving nations would, you know,
would need to want to receive them, right? So
like different from ranging from Senegal and The Gambia
all the way to Angola, you would have to
have, you know. Uh, GOVERNMENTAL representation that wants to
receive these ancestors and, you know, repatriate them, rebury
them in their country of origin, and obviously the
countries we have in this region today did not
exist back then when these people were kidnapped, right?
So that's one. But, um, so it, it is
a little bit more complicated than just sending people
back or these individuals back to where they came
from. However, it's not impossible and we're making real
steps towards um progress here because there are a
lot of cultural heritage, um, um, colleagues that are
working in the space of cultural. Heritage in many
different West African countries, for example, that would be
very interested in an opportunity like this, right? A
lot of West African countries are heavily investing in
memorializing and commemorating um what happened during the slave
trade, right? And not just like, you know what
happened to them, but also the role of a
certain ethnic groups. Groups and, and, and, and kingdoms
within Africa that contributed to the trade, right? So
Benin is really like clearly um emphasizing that uh
that role here um so there are, there are,
there are, we already like have conversations with some
um with some people across, for example, Western African
nations that could be partners in this pursuit. Other
people, and we had this debate too, other people
think like maybe it is also a good idea
or or reasonable to repatriate these ancestors in Lagos,
and just like have them in Lagos like itself,
to have like um a beautiful burial where they're
each, each ancestor gets a coffin and their skeletal
remains gets, you know, blessings and a proper funeral
with, with, with love and respect. Um, ALTHOUGH they
never wanted to come to Portugal, obviously, right, because
they were trafficked. Um, AND this is like something
that like some sites like, uh, in the, in
the Americas have, have chosen. For example, we, um,
this summer we had uh several colleagues from the
Annson Street African Burial Ground Project from Charleston in
South Carolina, which was also a so-called slave cemetery
that had to be excavated. Um, AND they did
strontium and also other, uh, you know, genetic analysis
on these ancestors to find out where they were
actually from, and that community like had, you know,
many community meetings and conversations with the, with the
black community to, to decide. Well, what shall happen
to these ancestors, and they decided that these ancestors
had been together for about 400 years in the
ground, and that they should stay together, you know,
that they're a burial community. So you might want
to say that too about Valladaga Fia, you know,
um, maybe like honoring them with a respectful burial
and like, you know, building a monument, uh, or,
or some kind of memorial site that people can
visit and be informed about what happened there, that
would already be. Uh, A huge step in the
right direction, uh, I think. The thing is just
that apparently the local municipality is, is, um, planning
on, on building some kind of a memorial site
or monument there in the park, but without any
consultation of the Afro descendant community in Portugal. Which
is, and you know, I'm, I'm in touch with
a lot of people and none of them are
being, you know, none of them are involved in
this endeavor. So it will probably be some kind
of monument that is being built. Uh, NOT with
the community, but maybe even against the wishes of
the community, and that would be just detrimental because
it's like such a missed opportunity to work hand
in hand if the goal is to right, like
some of the wrongs of the past, you know,
even if it's just like a tiny little bit.
Yeah,
OK, so Doctor Olza, uh, would you like to
tell people again, like you did in our first
conversation, where, where they can find your work on
the internet and also where they can perhaps learn
more if they're interested about, uh, the. Site at
Yeah, totally. So, um, you can always find me
under my lab's website, which is www. PA lab.com.
That's like my, my lab's website. Uh, BUT I
also have recently started building a website actually for
Valladaga Faria, um, with the URL www. Valladagafaria.info. And
so, uh, I'm still building that one, but uh
I think by the time that this is released,
I should have it like up and running so
people can go and check that out. Uh, Ricardo,
maybe I can give you the, the URLs again
so you can put them in, um, in the,
in the chat or uh in the discussion. Um,
BUT, uh, you can also like visit me on
my. Facebook profile where I uploaded a lot of
videos and pictures from the actual ancestor tribute if
you guys are interested in seeing how that looks
like, so that's all publicly visible. Um, MY, my
Facebook name is Vicky Olse, so you can find
me there and check it out and I also
like post any kind of update related to this
archaeological site right there. Uh, WE also have like
some other, um, upcoming publications like hopefully like maybe
early next year, there will be a paper coming
out where we also did some other project on
the transatlantic slave trade on the liberated Africans from
San Helena Island, which is absolutely extraordinary site where
we also use. Strontium isotope analysis to reconstruct where
these ancestors actually had been, you know, trafficked from,
uh, from the African continent. So stay tuned as
that gets published, um, yeah, and, uh, otherwise I'm,
I'm, I'm not too big on social media, so
I'm still very old school. You can only find
me under my websites and under Facebook.
OK, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show again. It's been a
fascinating conversation.
Perfect. Thanks a lot for giving me the opportunity
again.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pan Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Janasertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.